Astro 7 blog post (#2458)
withastro/astro.build: src/content/blog/astro-7.mdx

---
title: 'Astro 7.0'
description: 'Astro 7.0 brings faster builds with Vite 8, a new Rust compiler, Advanced Routing, background dev server support, and structured logging.'

> publishDate: 2026-06-15

Reviewer: We'll need to update the date:
```suggestion
publishDate: 2026-06-22
```

Astro 7 also introduces Advanced Routing, giving you a `src/fetch.ts` entrypoint with full control over Astro's request pipeline. For AI-assisted development, Astro can now detect coding agents, run the dev server in the background, and output structured JSON logs when agents need machine-readable feedback.

Full release highlights include:

- **[Vite 8](#vite-8)**
- **[Performance](#performance)**
  - **[Rust Compiler](#rust-compiler)**
  - **[Markdown & MDX in Rust](#markdown--mdx-in-rust)**
  - **[Queued Rendering](#queued-rendering)**
- **[Advanced Routing](#advanced-routing)**
- **[AI Enhancements](#ai-enhancements)**
  - **[Background Dev Server](#background-dev-server)**
  - **[JSON Logging](#json-logging)**
- **[Community](#community)**

## Upgrade now

To upgrade an existing project to Astro 7, use the automated `@astrojs/upgrade` CLI tool:

```sh
# Recommended:
npx @astrojs/upgrade

# Manual:
npm install astro@latest
```

For new projects, simply use:

```sh
npm create astro@latest
```

> {/* TODO: Link to migration guide once docs are finalized */}

Reviewer: Well, even though this is not yet published, the link should be https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/upgrade-to/v7/ so it shouldn't block the blog post!

| [https://astro.build](https://astro.build) (~308 pages) | 62.70s | 24.24s |
| [https://biomejs.dev](https://biomejs.dev) (~6,488 pages) | 176.39s | 149.90s |
| [https://developers.cloudflare.com](https://developers.cloudflare.com) (8,431 pages) | 386.89s | 261.94s |
| [https://tauri.app](https://tauri.app) (7,117 pages) | 86.12s | 55.33s |
| [https://aspire.dev](https://aspire.dev) (13,275 pages) | 385.84s | 326.11s |

### Rust Compiler

We built a new compiler for the `.astro` component format, now written in Rust. The compiler is a full rewrite of our previous Go-based compiler that is mostly backwards compatible, except for:

- **No more HTML correction.** The Go compiler silently rewrote your markup to be "valid HTML" by reordering elements, auto-closing tags, and moving nodes around in ways that often surprised users and caused hard-to-debug issues. The new compiler treats your markup as-is.
- **JSX-style strictness.** Unclosed tags like `<div>Hello` and unterminated attributes like `<div class="Hello >` now produce errors instead of being silently corrected. These are real bugs in templates that the old compiler silently ignored in an attempt to behave like the browser.

> - **JSX whitespace handling.** Whitespace between elements is now collapsed following JSX conventions, matching the behavior of React and other JSX-based frameworks. For example, newlines between inline elements no longer produce a visible space:

Reviewer: The rendering looks a bit weird:

<img width="804" height="456" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cc0933b3-574d-416e-ae12-e76a2969164c" />

I would expect the bullet points to be aligned with the text. I can see we have something similar in the v6 blog post and this is correctly rendered in the preview: https://blog-astro-7.previews.astro.build/blog/astro-6/#upgraded-packages

I can't see any difference in the text right now. I don't know what is going wrong here... 👀

Reviewer 2: I bet it's caused by the initial bold

Reviewer: Yeah, I also thought it was that, but the v6 post also uses bold at the start and this works fine there...

I just tested it locally, and it seems the culprit is actually the code snippet below! If we remove the empty line, list items are no longer wrapped with a `<p />` and are correctly aligned with the bullet points. 😅

> 

Reviewer: Removing this empty line seems to fix https://github.com/withastro/astro.build/pull/2458#discussion_r3424184815
```suggestion
```

  ```astro
  <!-- Before: renders as "Hello World" (with a space) -->
  <!-- After: renders as "HelloWorld" (no space) -->
  <span>Hello</span>
  <span>World</span>

  <!-- To preserve the space, use an explicit expression: -->
  <span>Hello</span>{' '}<span>World</span>
  ```

Moving to Rust allowed us to ship native binaries for supported platforms, with a WASM fallback for environments that need it. This pattern is now standard in the JavaScript tooling world, used by projects such as Rolldown and Lightning CSS. Under the hood, the new compiler is built on [oxc](https://oxc.rs/) for parsing and [Lightning CSS](https://lightningcss.dev/) for CSS scoping.

> In isolation, the Rust compiler showed a roughly 6% improvement in build times on docs.astro.build. That's because `.astro` compilation is rarely the bottleneck; Markdown processing and bundling typically dominate build time. But every bit adds up, especially on large sites with thousands of pages, and the compiler's gains compound with the other performance improvements in this release.

Reviewer: nit: I think wrapping `docs.astro.build` with a link or swapping it with "Astro Docs" could improve readability:
```suggestion
In isolation, the Rust compiler showed a roughly 6% improvement in build times on [https://docs.astro.build](https://docs.astro.build). That's because `.astro` compilation is rarely the bottleneck; Markdown processing and bundling typically dominate build time. But every bit adds up, especially on large sites with thousands of pages, and the compiler's gains compound with the other performance improvements in this release.
```

### Markdown & MDX in Rust

> Astro 7 replaces the default Markdown and MDX pipeline with [Sätteri](https://satteri.bruits.org/), a Rust-powered processor created by Astro core team member <Mention name="erika" />. Switching the Astro docs and Cloudflare docs builds to Sätteri each shaved over a minute off their build times, making Markdown-heavy sites the biggest winners in Astro 7.

Reviewer 3: The "each" here is not needed
```suggestion
Astro 7 replaces the default Markdown and MDX pipeline with [Sätteri](https://satteri.bruits.org/), a Rust-powered processor created by Astro core team member <Mention name="erika" />. Switching the Astro docs and Cloudflare docs builds to Sätteri shaved over a minute off their build times, making Markdown-heavy sites the biggest winners in Astro 7.
```

Until now, Astro's Markdown pipeline ran on [unified](https://unifiedjs.com/) (remark, rehype, and a long tail of JavaScript dependencies). On large sites with thousands of pages, that pipeline was often the slowest phase of the build: each file parsed through JavaScript, run through plugin after plugin over the full AST, then serialized back to HTML. In Astro 6.4, we [made the pipeline pluggable](/blog/astro-640/#new-markdownprocessor-api) and shipped Sätteri as an opt-in alternative. Astro 7 makes it the default.

> Under the hood, Sätteri uses [pulldown-cmark](https://github.com/pulldown-cmark/pulldown-cmark) for CommonMark parsing and [OXC](https://oxc.rs/) for MDX expression parsing, both native Rust. It ships platform-specific binaries with a WASM fallback, the same approach used by the new `.astro` compiler. Speed isn't the only win, though. Sätteri also implements many Markdown features natively that previously required separate plugins:

Reviewer 3: The spelling for the project is "Oxc", `oxc` if we mean to talk about the library dirrectly.
```suggestion
Under the hood, Sätteri uses [pulldown-cmark](https://github.com/pulldown-cmark/pulldown-cmark) for CommonMark parsing and [Oxc](https://oxc.rs/) for MDX expression parsing, both native Rust. It ships platform-specific binaries with a WASM fallback, the same approach used by the new `.astro` compiler. Speed isn't the only win, though. Sätteri also implements many Markdown features natively that previously required separate plugins:
```

Author: TIL

> | Feature | unified | Sätteri |

Reviewer: I haven't tested on an actual mobile yet, but using the browser feature (iPhone 14 preset on Firefox), this doesn't look good:

<img width="380" height="488" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b9a02b6d-6062-46e7-a188-e32f7f5cf114" />

Reviewer 4: I was able to reproduce the same rendering issue on a physical device (iPhone 15 Pro Max, Safari 26.1), although it's not as severe as in the screenshot above since the content at least remains within the table.

<img width="323" height="699" alt="IMG_6233" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d46de8cd-634c-4377-bec2-b612d3cff93e" />

Author: I think the actual mobile one looks fine. I'll see if i can fix the CSS so it remains within the table.

Reviewer: Well, it depends on the screen resolution. I tested on my Xiaomi Poco with Firefox, and unfortunately I get exactly the same result as in my screenshot. 😢

Author: I adjusted the CSS and it looks a bit better.

<img width="425" height="691" alt="Screenshot 2026-06-18 at 10 20 31 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bf613ddb-efe7-4c66-ae13-bc4a5e8e93f0" />

Reviewer: Still the same on my side:

![Screenshot_2026-06-18-16-32-22-562_org.mozilla.firefox-edit.jpg](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fb250998-faff-4741-993e-fc84899f8927)

But I checked locally, if we replace `align-baseline` with `align-top`, this fixes it. I don't know if there is a good reason to use baseline. This was added in #1174

(edit: ah, sorry for the big image... I didn't realize the dimensions, I was on mobile 😅 )

Non-default features are enabled through the `features` option:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import { satteri } from '@astrojs/markdown-satteri';

export default defineConfig({
  markdown: {
    processor: satteri({
      features: {
        directive: true,
        math: true,
        headingAttributes: true,
      },
    }),
  },
});
```

Sätteri has its own plugin API too. Plugins declare which node types they care about and skip the rest, instead of walking the entire tree on every pass. This makes adding plugins much cheaper than in unified, where every plugin traverses every node.

If you depend on remark or rehype plugins, the unified-based pipeline is still available via `@astrojs/markdown-remark`:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import { unified } from '@astrojs/markdown-remark';
import remarkToc from 'remark-toc';

export default defineConfig({
  markdown: {
    processor: unified({
      remarkPlugins: [remarkToc],
    }),
  },
});
```

Learn more about Sätteri's features and plugin API at [satteri.bruits.org](https://satteri.bruits.org/).

### Queued Rendering

> Queued rendering is stable, and the default rendering engine. It's **~2.4× faster**[^1] in speed!

Reviewer 3: The wording feels a bit odd here, I would probably give a bit more context on it.
```suggestion
Queued rendering was introduced in Astro 6.0 as an experimental option and is now stable and the default rendering engine. It's **~2.4× faster**[^1] in speed!
```

```js title="astro.config.mjs" del={5-9}
import { defineConfig } from "astro/config";

export default defineConfig({
	experimental: {
		queuedRendering: {
			enabled: true,
			pooling: true,
			contentCache: 1000
		}
	}
})
```

> Previously, Astro rendered pages using a recursive approach where children were rendered using the same `render*` function. Below, some pseudocode that explains it:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Previously, Astro rendered pages using a recursive approach where children were rendered using the same `render*` function, like in the following pseudocode:
```

```ts title="render.ts"
export function renderComponentToString(node: unknown): string {
	let destination = "";
	destination += `<${node.name}>`; // opening tag

	// render attributes

	for (const child of node.children) {
		// Here's where we recurse the children by calling renderComponentToString
		destination += renderComponentToString(child);
	}

> 	destination += `</${node.name}>`; // opening tag

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
	destination += `</${node.name}>`; // closing tag
```

	return destination;
}
```

The new engine uses a queue (or stack) and a single loop. The queue is populated with child nodes in the correct order, and the loop keeps rendering nodes until the queue is drained.
The following pseudocode is an oversimplified version of the real deal, but it should provide a clear picture:

```ts title="render.ts"
export function renderComponentToString(root: unknown): string {
	let destination = "";
	destination += `<${root.name}>`; // opening tag

	// this is our queue, populated and flushed as we render
	let stack = [root];

	while (stack.length > 0) {
		const node = stack.pop();

		if (Array.isArray(node)) {
			// The nodes at the very end must be rendered to destination first
			for (let i = node.length - 1; i >= 0; i--) stack.push(node[i]);
			continue;
		}

		const nodeType = typeof node;
		if (nodeType === 'string') {
			destination += escapeHTML(node as string);
		}
	}
	destination += `</${root.name}>`; // opening tag
	return destination;
}
```

The first implementation of the strategy worked on a two-pass phase:  create an ordered list of components (nodes), and loop the list and render the components.

> The new implementation doesn't create a full list anymore, instead the list is rendered (flushed) while it's looped. This final approach is faster than the first iteration, and needs less memory compared to the recursive approach. Early benchmarks showed that it's

Reviewer 3: I think you forgot to finish the benchmark sentence @ematipico, I assume you want to mention the "2.4x faster" but warning you in case you want to add more information like a benchmark table or something.

Reviewer 2: Done! It was a leftover

[^1]: The savings are visible in expressions-dense pages. Static pages wouldn't see much savings.

## Advanced Routing

Astro started as a static site generator with file-based routing. Over time, features like middleware, redirects, rewrites, Actions, sessions, and i18n gave Astro apps more server-side power, but they also made the request lifecycle harder to control. If you needed auth to run before Actions, logging to wrap only page rendering, or a non-Astro API to handle some requests first, you had to work around the pipeline instead of composing it directly.

> In Astro 7 you can now take full control over Astro's request pipeline by adding a `src/fetch.ts` file to your project. This file exports the standard `fetch` handler pattern popularized by [Cloudflare Workers](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/runtime-apis/handlers/fetch/), [Deno](https://docs.deno.com/runtime/fundamentals/http_server/), and [Bun](https://bun.sh/docs/api/http#bun-serve).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Astro 7, you can now take full control over Astro's request pipeline by adding a `src/fetch.ts` file to your project. This file exports the standard `fetch` handler pattern popularized by [Cloudflare Workers](https://developers.cloudflare.com/workers/runtime-apis/handlers/fetch/), [Deno](https://docs.deno.com/runtime/fundamentals/http_server/), and [Bun](https://bun.sh/docs/api/http#bun-serve).
```

```ts title="src/fetch.ts"
import { astro, FetchState } from 'astro/fetch';

export default {
  fetch(request: Request) {
    const state = new FetchState(request);

    // Forward API requests to a backend service
    if (state.url.pathname.startsWith('/api')) {
      const url = new URL(state.url.pathname + state.url.search, 'https://backend-api.example.com');
      return fetch(new Request(url, request));
    }

>     // Fallback to Astro pages / endpoints

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    // Fallback to Astro pages/endpoints
```

app.use(middleware());
app.use(timing());     // Timing wraps only page rendering
app.use(pages());

export default app;
```

If you don't add a `src/fetch.ts` file, Astro behaves exactly as it does today.

## AI Enhancements

AI coding agents are now part of many developers' workflows, and they need different things from a dev server than humans do. Astro 7 is our first step toward making Astro a better platform for agent-driven development.

### Background Dev Server

AI agents struggle with long-running processes. They shell out, wait for exit, and read output, but a dev server never exits. Agents hang, start duplicate servers, lose track of running instances, or leave zombie processes behind. We see this as part of Astro's automated issue triage as well, with agents sometimes spending more time fumbling with dev servers than testing code.

Astro 7 adds `astro dev --background`, which starts the dev server as a managed background process. **Astro can also detect when it's running inside an AI agent** and enable background mode automatically, so no flags are needed in agent workflows. If no agent is detected, `astro dev` behaves exactly as before.

```sh
$ astro dev --background

> [astro] Dev server running at http://localhost:4321 (pid 12345)

Reviewer 4: nit: feel free to ignore if this is intentional, but there's no `[astro]` prefix in the actual output, so this line should be:

```suggestion
Dev server running at http://localhost:4321 (pid 12345)
```

  Stop:   astro dev stop
  Status: astro dev status
  Logs:   astro dev logs
```

The command blocks until the server is ready to accept requests, reports the URL and process ID, then detaches. No polling, no sleeping, no parsing terminal output for "Local:".

A **lockfile** prevents duplicate instances. If an agent tries to start a second server, it gets back the existing instance's details instead of spawning a conflicting process:

```sh
$ astro dev --background

> [astro] Dev server already running at http://localhost:4321 (pid 12345)

Reviewer 4: Same as above:

```suggestion
Dev server already running at http://localhost:4321 (pid 12345)
```

```

> You can check status, read logs, and stop the server from separate shell sessions:

Reviewer: We have "You can also read the background server's logs with `astro dev logs`." below the code snippet, so it sounds a bit redundant:
```suggestion
You can check status and stop the server from separate shell sessions:
```

```sh
$ astro dev status

> [astro] Dev server running at http://localhost:4321 (pid 12345)

Reviewer 4: nit: no `[astro]` prefix, and the actual output also includes the uptime (plus a `background` marker when started with `--background`):

```suggestion
Dev server running at http://localhost:4321 (pid 12345, uptime 123s, background)
```

$ astro dev stop

> [astro] Stopped dev server (pid 12345).

Reviewer 4: Same as above:

```suggestion
Stopped dev server (pid 12345).
```

import { astro } from 'astro/hono';
import { Hono } from 'hono';
import { basicAuth } from 'hono/basic-auth';

const app = new Hono();
app.use(basicAuth({ username: 'admin', password: 'secret' }));
app.use(astro());

export default app;
```

For advanced usage, you can compose individual Astro features as separate middleware, giving you full control over the request pipeline. If you've ever used Astro middleware and been frustrated that your auth check ran *after* Astro Actions, or that you couldn't log response timing without wrapping everything yourself, you can now put your code exactly where it needs to be:

```ts title="src/fetch.ts"
import { Hono } from 'hono';
import { actions, middleware, pages, i18n } from 'astro/hono';
import { auth } from './middleware/auth';
import { timing } from './middleware/timing';

const app = new Hono();

app.use(i18n());
app.use(auth());       // Auth runs before actions, no unauthenticated calls
app.use(actions());
app.use(middleware());
app.use(timing());     // Timing wraps only page rendering
app.use(pages());

export default app;
```

If you don't add a `src/fetch.ts` file, Astro behaves exactly as it does today.

## Route Caching

> Caching on-demand rendered responses is harder than it should be. Every host does it differently, and there has never been a standard way to control it from your application code. Astro 7 introduces [route caching](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/caching/) to solve this. First released experimentally [in Astro 6](/blog/astro-6/#experimental-route-caching), this is now stable, and adds a single platform-agnostic API for caching: set directives in your routes and Astro handles the rest wherever you deploy.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Caching on-demand rendered responses is harder than it should be. Every host does it differently, and there has never been a standard way to control it from your application code. Astro 7 introduces [route caching](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/caching/) to solve this. First released experimentally [in Astro 6](/blog/astro-6/#experimental-route-caching), the feature is now stable and adds a single platform-agnostic API for caching: set directives in your routes, and Astro handles the rest wherever you deploy.
```

> You configure a cache provider once, then use `Astro.cache` in your pages (or `context.cache` in API routes and middleware) to control caching per response, based on standard HTTP caching semantics. Astro ships with a built-in `memoryCache` provider to get you started:

Reviewer: consistency nit: I believe all other functions in the post uses this notation:
```suggestion
You configure a cache provider once, then use `Astro.cache` in your pages (or `context.cache` in API routes and middleware) to control caching per response, based on standard HTTP caching semantics. Astro ships with a built-in `memoryCache()` provider to get you started:
```

  },
});
```

```astro title="src/pages/products/[id].astro"
---
Astro.cache.set({
  maxAge: 120, // Cache for 2 minutes
  swr: 60, // Serve stale for 1 minute while revalidating
  tags: ['products'], // Tag for targeted invalidation
});
---
```

You can also define caching rules for groups of routes declaratively in your config with `routeRules`, keeping caching out of your route code entirely:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
export default defineConfig({
  cache: { provider: memoryCache() },
  routeRules: {
    '/blog/[...path]': { maxAge: 300, swr: 60 },
  },
});
```

Where route caching really shines is its integration with [live content collections](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/content-collections/#live-content-collections). A live loader can attach a cache hint to the data it returns, with tags for invalidation and a last-modified time for freshness. Pass that entry straight to `Astro.cache.set()` and Astro reads the hint for you, no manual headers required:

```ts
import { getLiveEntry } from 'astro:content';
const { entry } = await getLiveEntry('products', Astro.params.id);

// Astro reads the loader's cache hint from the entry:
Astro.cache.set(entry);

> ```

Reviewer: missing code fences and title:
````suggestion
```astro title="src/pages/products/[id].astro"
---
import { getLiveEntry } from 'astro:content';
const { entry } = await getLiveEntry('products', Astro.params.id);

// Astro reads the loader's cache hint from the entry:
Astro.cache.set(entry);
---
```
````

  const { slug } = await request.json();

  // Invalidate every response tagged 'products'...
  await cache.invalidate({ tags: ["products"] });

  // ...invalidate every page that used a particular entry...
  await cache.invalidate({ tags: [`products:${slug}`] });

  // ...or purge a single path directly.
  await cache.invalidate({ path: `/products/${slug}` });

  return new Response('Revalidated');
};
```

If you tried route caching while it was experimental, the only change is to move `cache` and `routeRules` out of the `experimental` block to the top level of your config. The API is otherwise unchanged. See the [route caching guide](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/caching/) for the full reference.

### CDN Cache Providers

When route caching shipped in Astro 6, it came with a single in-memory provider to use with the Node adapter. Astro 7 adds experimental CDN providers for Netlify, Vercel, and Cloudflare (in private beta).

Rather than storing responses in memory, these providers push your caching directives down to the host's edge network, for even faster responses. Cache hits are then served straight from the CDN, without invoking your server function at all.

> In a future release these providers will be enabled automatically, but during the experimental phase you should add them manually. Import the provider for your adapter and set it as your cache provider:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In a future release, these providers will be enabled automatically, but during the experimental phase you should add them manually. Import the provider for your adapter and set it as your cache provider:
```

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';
import netlify from '@astrojs/netlify';
import { cacheNetlify } from '@astrojs/netlify/cache';

export default defineConfig({
  adapter: netlify(),
  cache: {
    provider: cacheNetlify(),
  },
});
```

Each adapter exports a provider from its `/cache` entrypoint:

| Adapter | Import | Provider |
| -- | -- | -- |
| Netlify | `@astrojs/netlify/cache` | `cacheNetlify()` |
| Vercel | `@astrojs/vercel/cache` | `cacheVercel()` |

> | Cloudflare <sup>[⚠️](#private-beta)</sup>| `@astrojs/cloudflare/cache` | `cacheCloudflare()` |

Reviewer: We have the same issue as in the other table. On mobile with my resolution, Cloudflare is a bit truncated:

<img width="363" height="108" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/70ddb4f5-c682-4330-8c38-e1ed7668ce9a" />

> The same `Astro.cache`, `routeRules`, and `cache.invalidate()` APIs work with every provider. Each one translates your directives into the platform's native cache-control headers and tag- or path-based purges.

Reviewer: nit: do we need to explicitly mention `cache.invalidate()` here? I mean, this is available in `Astro.cache`, so it sounds a bit redundant.

<Note title="Private beta"><a name="private-beta"></a>

> The Cloudflare provider requires the Cloudflare Workers Cache feature, which is currently in private beta. Without beta access it does not work and should not be used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Cloudflare provider requires the Cloudflare Workers Cache feature, which is currently in private beta. Without beta access, it does not work and should not be used.
```

```ts title="render.ts"
export function renderComponentToString(root: unknown): string {
	let destination = "";
	destination += `<${root.name}>`; // opening tag

	// this is our queue, populated and flushed as we render
	let stack = [root];

	while (stack.length > 0) {
		const node = stack.pop();

		if (Array.isArray(node)) {
			// The nodes at the very end must be rendered to destination first
			for (let i = node.length - 1; i >= 0; i--) stack.push(node[i]);
			continue;
		}

		const nodeType = typeof node;
		if (nodeType === 'string') {
			destination += escapeHTML(node as string);
		}
	}
	destination += `</${root.name}>`; // opening tag
	return destination;
}
```

The first implementation of the strategy worked on a two-pass phase:  create an ordered list of components (nodes), and loop the list and render the components.

The new implementation doesn't create a full list anymore, instead the list is rendered (flushed) while it's looped. This final approach is faster than the first iteration, and needs less memory compared to the recursive approach.

[^1]: The savings are visible in expressions-dense pages. Static pages wouldn't see much savings.

## Advanced Routing

> Astro started as a static site generator with file-based routing. Over time, features like middleware, redirects, rewrites, Actions, sessions, and i18n gave Astro apps more server-side power, but they also made the request lifecycle harder to control. If you needed auth to run before Actions, logging to wrap only page rendering, or a non-Astro API to handle some requests first, you had to work around the pipeline instead of composing it directly.

Reviewer 5: Why is `Actions` capitalized? I think it should be lowercase like all other features listed:

```suggestion
Astro started as a static site generator with file-based routing. Over time, features like middleware, redirects, rewrites, actions, sessions, and i18n gave Astro apps more server-side power, but they also made the request lifecycle harder to control. If you needed auth to run before actions, logging to wrap only page rendering, or a non-Astro API to handle some requests first, you had to work around the pipeline instead of composing it directly.
```

Even if it is capitalized because "Astro Actions" is a proper name, I think it looks somewhat weird and confusing in this context. Maybe put it at the end of the list instead... 🤔

```ts title="src/fetch.ts"
import { astro, FetchState } from 'astro/fetch';

export default {
  fetch(request: Request) {
    const state = new FetchState(request);

    // Forward API requests to a backend service
    if (state.url.pathname.startsWith('/api')) {
      const url = new URL(state.url.pathname + state.url.search, 'https://backend-api.example.com');
      return fetch(new Request(url, request));
    }

    // Fallback to Astro pages/endpoints
    return astro(state);
  }
}
```

The API is also compatible with [Hono](https://hono.dev/), allowing you to bring Hono middleware into your Astro application:

```ts title="src/fetch.ts"
import { astro } from 'astro/hono';
import { Hono } from 'hono';
import { basicAuth } from 'hono/basic-auth';

const app = new Hono();
app.use(basicAuth({ username: 'admin', password: 'secret' }));
app.use(astro());

export default app;
```

> For advanced usage, you can compose individual Astro features as separate middleware, giving you full control over the request pipeline. If you've ever used Astro middleware and been frustrated that your auth check ran *after* Astro Actions, or that you couldn't log response timing without wrapping everything yourself, you can now put your code exactly where it needs to be:

Reviewer 5: Same here once more:

```suggestion
For advanced usage, you can compose individual Astro features as separate middleware, giving you full control over the request pipeline. If you've ever used Astro middleware and been frustrated that your auth check ran *after* Astro actions, or that you couldn't log response timing without wrapping everything yourself, you can now put your code exactly where it needs to be:
```

app.use(middleware());
app.use(timing());     // Timing wraps only page rendering
app.use(pages());

export default app;
```

If you don't add a `src/fetch.ts` file, Astro behaves exactly as it does today.

## Route Caching

Caching on-demand rendered responses is harder than it should be. Every host does it differently, and there has never been a standard way to control it from your application code. Astro 7 introduces [route caching](https://docs.astro.build/en/guides/caching/) to solve this. First released experimentally [in Astro 6](/blog/astro-6/#experimental-route-caching), the feature is now stable and adds a single platform-agnostic API for caching: set directives in your routes, and Astro handles the rest wherever you deploy.

You configure a cache provider once, then use `Astro.cache` in your pages (or `context.cache` in API routes and middleware) to control caching per response, based on standard HTTP caching semantics. Astro ships with a built-in `memoryCache()` provider to get you started:

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig, memoryCache } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  cache: {
    provider: memoryCache(),
  },
});
```

> ```astro title="src/pages/products/[id].astro"
> ---
> Astro.cache.set({
>   maxAge: 120, // Cache for 2 minutes
>   swr: 60, // Serve stale for 1 minute while revalidating
>   tags: ['products'], // Tag for targeted invalidation
> });
> ---
> ```

Reviewer 5: To emphasis that this only works on on-demand pages, we could add the `prerender = false` export here:

````suggestion
```astro title="src/pages/products/[id].astro"
---
export const prerender = false;

Astro.cache.set({
  maxAge: 120, // Cache for 2 minutes
  swr: 60, // Serve stale for 1 minute while revalidating
  tags: ['products'], // Tag for targeted invalidation
});
---
```
````
